docs: document custom step usage (#1125)
slackapi/bolt-python: docs/content/basic/custom-steps.md

---
title: Listening and responding to custom steps
lang: en
slug: /concepts/custom-steps
---

> Your app can use the `function()` method to listen to incoming custom step requests. The method requires a step `callback_id` of type `str`. This `callback_id` must also be defined in your [Function](https://api.slack.com/concepts/manifests#functions) definition. Custom steps must be finalized using the `complete()` or `fail()` listener arguments to notify Slack that your app has processed the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your app can use the `function()` method to listen to incoming [custom step requests](https://api.slack.com/automation/functions/custom-bolt). The method requires a step `callback_id` of type `str`. This `callback_id` must also be defined in your [Function](https://api.slack.com/concepts/manifests#functions) definition. Custom steps must be finalized using the `complete()` or `fail()` listener arguments to notify Slack that your app has processed the request.
```

---
title: Listening and responding to custom steps
lang: en
slug: /concepts/custom-steps
---

> Your app can use the `function()` method to listen to incoming [custom step requests](https://api.slack.com/automation/functions/custom-bolt). Custom steps are used in Workflow Builder to build workflows. The method requires a step `callback_id` of type `str`. This `callback_id` must also be defined in your [Function](https://api.slack.com/concepts/manifests#functions) definition. Custom steps must be finalized using the `complete()` or `fail()` listener arguments to notify Slack that your app has processed the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your app can use the `function()` listener to listen to incoming [custom step requests](https://api.slack.com/automation/functions/custom-bolt).

Adding a custom step starts with a definition in [the app manifest](https://api.slack.com/concepts/manifests#functions) and a `function()` listener listening for the `callback_id` of that function. Upon function execution the listener is called and can run whatever code, but must finish with either the `complete()` or `fail()` listener argument to end the step:
```

Same suggestion as https://github.com/slackapi/bolt-js/pull/2198#discussion_r1715948126

Author: The rest of the documentation uses the `method` terminology instead of the `listener` 

I think its better to be consistent and stick to `method`

We can send a follow up PR to update all the terms 👍

> * `complete()` requires **one** argument: `outputs` of type `dict`. It completes your custom step **successfully** and provides a dictionary containing the outputs of your custom step as per its definition.
> * `fail()` requires **one** argument: `error` of type `str`. It completes your custom step **unsuccessfully** and provides a message containing information regarding why your custom step failed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `complete()` requires **one** argument: `outputs` of type `dict`. It ends your custom step **successfully** and provides a dictionary containing the outputs of your custom step as per its definition.
* `fail()` requires **one** argument: `error` of type `str`. It end your custom step **unsuccessfully** and provides a message containing information regarding why your custom step failed.
```

Same suggestion as https://github.com/slackapi/bolt-js/pull/2198#discussion_r1715951664!

You can reference your custom step's inputs using the `inputs` listener argument of type `dict`.

Refer to [the module document](https://slack.dev/bolt-python/api-docs/slack_bolt/kwargs_injection/args.html) to learn about the available listener arguments.

```python
# This sample custom step formats an input and outputs it
@app.function("sample_custom_step")

> def sample_step_callback(inputs: dict, ack: Ack, fail: Fail, complete: Complete):
>     try:
>         ack()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
def sample_step_callback(inputs: dict, fail: Fail, complete: Complete):
    try:
```

Calling `ack` seems to be valid here but I don't think it's necessary 🤔  Please correct me if this is wrong though!

Author: I prefer to keep it in the docs, there are a number of issues opened related to calling `ack` before executing custom logic

Keeping it in hopes that it will help developers avoid a bug 🙏

        message = inputs["message"]
        complete(
            outputs={
                "message": f":wave: You submitted the following message: \n\n>{message}"
            }
        )
    except Exception as e:
        fail(f"Failed to handle a custom step request (error: {e})")
        raise e
```

<details>
  <summary>
  Listening to custom step actions
  </summary>
  Your app can listen to user actions, like button clicks, created from `custom steps` using the `action` method.
  
  Actions can be filtered on an `action_id` of type `str` or `re.Pattern`. `action_id`s act as unique identifiers for interactive components on the Slack platform.

  Your app can skip calling `complete()` or `fail()` in the `function()` method if the custom step creates an `action` that waits for user interaction. However, in the `action()` method, your app must invoke `complete()` or `fail()` to notify Slack that the custom step has been processed.

```python
# This sample custom step posts a message with a button
@app.function("custom_step_button")

> def sample_step_callback(inputs: dict, say: Say, fail: Fail):

Reviewer 2: Do we need to include imports for `Say` or `Fail` in this example? I'm not sure at all- please ignore if not!

Author: I don't think we need to it is not done in other examples, actually other examples don specify the type, I will remove them 🙏
